---------
TAXTASTIC
---------

We love it, but what is it?
---------------------------

Taxtastic is a series of python scripts to build and maintain "reference packages"-- i.e. collections of reference trees, reference alignments, profiles, and associated taxonomic information.
We've only just begun.

Here's a quick synopsis of how it's used. 
Say we would like to assemble a reference package for the gene *rpoB*.
We have a reference alignment (here rpoB.fasta) and an ML tree built from the reference alignment (here RAxML_result.rpoB.PROTGAMMAWAGF).
We also have a whitespace-delimited list of taxon ids (here rpoB.ids_only) for the sequences in our reference alignment.
We also have a CSV file mapping sequence names to taxon ids (here rpoB.seq_info.csv).
Specifically, it contains two columns, labeled "seqname" and "tax_id" giving that mapping.

We can make a taxonomically-informed reference set in just two steps. 
First we generate the taxonomy::

  taxtable.py -t rpoB.ids_only > rpoB.taxonomy

When performed for the first time, this downloads the NCBI taxonomy and builds a SQLite3 database from it. 
That takes a while, but it only needs to be performed once.
Then::

  taxomatic.py create -s RAxML_info.rpoB.PROTGAMMAWAGF -t RAxML_result.rpsB.PROTGAMMAWAGF -f rpoB.aln -T rpoB.taxonomy -i rpoB.seq_info.csv -P rpoB.refpkg 

Now, given a query sequence alignment which is in frame with your reference alignment, you can run pplacer (from the "tax" git branch) to get taxonomically annotated placements, and visualizations combining both taxonomic and phylogenetic placements with two more steps::

  pplacer -c rpoB.refpkg sample.fasta
  placeviz -c rpoB.refpkg sample.place

Shaweet!
